>Dataset: Deep permafrost depths derived from borehole temperature
measurements.

>Spatial Coverage: Alaska (Arctic coastal plain and the Brooks Range)

>Institution: U.S. Geological Survey

>Contact: Gary Clow; U.S. Geological Survey, Box 25046, MS980,
Denver CO 80225 303-236-5509; email= clow@usgs.gov

>Data collection: The borehole temperature measurements from which
the permafrost depths were derived were collected between 1949 and 1991
under the direction of Art Lachenbruch and Max Brewer of the U.S.
Geological Survey. In each case, the temperature sensor consisted of a
thermistor, or array of thermistors. The measurements were made
predominantly within fluid-filled boreholes; a few of the early logs (eg.
sites CTC and CTD) were acquired from thermistor-strings frozen in place.
The technique used to acquire a temperature reading in a fluid-filled hole
has evolved considerably over the years. The early logs were obtained by
letting the temperature sensor equilibrate at fixed depths and then
measuring the sensor's resistance with a Wheatstone Bridge or commercial
Digital Multimeter (DMM), when they became available. Later logs were made
by measuring the sensor's resistance with a DMM while the sensor descended
into the hole at a fixed rate, generally about 10 cm/s. Once obtained, the
resistance measurements were converted to temperature using calibration
constants derived at the USGS's temperature calibration facility.

>Analysis: Temperatures in the vicinity of a deep borehole are
disturbed by various drilling processes, the most important of which is the
circulation of relatively warm fluid throughout the hole during drilling.
This "drilling disturbance" must be accounted for when determining
permafrost depth. The method we use to determine the permafrost depth at a
well site depends on whether multiple temperature logs are available. 1) If
multiple temperature logs from a well are available, the information in the
logs is used in conjunction with a drilling disturbance model (see
Lachenbruch and Brewer [1959]) to determine the undisturbed temperature
profile in the vicinity of the hole. The permafrost depth is then given by
the depth where the undisturbed temperature profile is 0 C. 2) For holes
where only a single temperature log is available, the 0 C depth near the
well at the time of the log is determined from the measured temperature
profile. The true permafrost depth is deeper due to the effects of the
drilling disturbance on the measured log. Given the drilling duration and
the amount of time elapsed between hole completion and the acquisition of
the log, the remaining drilling disturbance is estimated from the behavior
of nearby wells drilled in similar materials for which we have multiple
logs. From this estimate, the 0 C depth from the single temperature log is
"corrected" to determine the true permafrost depth.

>References: The permafrost depths presented here represent an
update of earlier work published by Lachenbruch et al. [1982] and
Lachenbruch et al. [1987]. The new depths utilize temperature logs acquired
after 1987; additional cleaning has also been performed on the earlier
logs. The new work has not yet been published; contact Gary Clow for
further information.

Citations:

Lachenbruch, A.H. and M.C. Brewer (1959): Dissipation of the
temperature effect of drilling a well in Arctic Alaska, U.S. Geol. Surv.
Bull., 1083-C, 73-109.

Lachenbruch, A.H., J.H. Sass, B.V. Marshall, and T.H. Moses, Jr.
(1982): Permafrost, heat flow, and the geothermal regime at Prudhoe Bay,
Alaska, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 9301-9316.

Lachenbruch, A.H., J.H. Sass, L.A. Lawver, M.C. Brewer, B.V.
Marshall, R.J. Munroe, J.P. Kennelly, Jr., S.P. Galanis, and T.H. Moses,
Jr. (1987): Temperature and depth of permafrost on the Alaskan arctic
slope, in Tailleur, I. and P. Weimer, eds., Alaskan North Slope Geology:
Bakersfield, Society of Economic Paleotologists and Mineralogists, Pacific
Section, v. 2, 545-558.

